# indicator_framework

Many methods exist to determine whether a microbe can be considered an indicator of environmental conditions, however there is no widely used method to assess the effectiveness of these indicators to separate samples into groups. To address this, 16S amplicon data from a previously published two-year sediment study and unpublished water data was used to create indicator lists associated with four taxonomic levels, three metadata categories, and three indicator tests. To provide a statistical basis for the use of one of these lists for future analyses, the ability of these indicators to correctly separate samples between two sample types was evaluated by using partitioning around medoids clustering and the product of the sensitivity and specificity when comparing the microbially-predicted groups to the metadata-defined groups. 
Indicator analysis typically involves tracking changes in a few named, biologically relevant organisms, excluding indicators with low taxonomic resolution. To address this, the affected indicator percentage (AIP) considered the entire indicator community by using the percentage of sequences associated with the “affected” status over the total number of indicator sequences. The effectiveness of this metric was tested by comparing the first year AIPs to the second year AIPs. AIP trends were similar between years and the ecology of the indicator microbes agreed with measured environmental variables. A two-step framework was established which (1) provides a method to statistically determine which indicator list to use in analysis and (2) uses the AIP metric to evaluate changes in the total indicator microbiome both spatially and temporally among samples.

Manuscript is in submission
